---
layout: post
title: "Writing for all the wrong reasons"
hidden: True
date: 2025-07-18 10:00:00 +00000
---

Write for the bitches!
As long as you write, the bar is not that high.
Just say something profound.
How love is infinite,
but time is not.
In the gap between the two,
the meaning of a life was found.

Write for the power!
Flatter the in-group.
Criticize the out-group.
Befriend the man who buys ink by the barrel.
But don't write for the masses.
Get a handful of important people to read your writing.
Make sure they not only read it, they should _love_ it.
If that doesn't give you power, find people who are even more important.
Rinse and repeat until you have the desired level of power.


Write for the money!
Come up with a single, loose theory that changes everything.
If you're short on imagination—and let's be honest, since you're reading this, you probably are—pick something in self-help or finance.
Then come up with bunch of examples that corroborate what you're saying.
Make sure the theory is sufficiently vague to fit in _any_ example, otherwise the second step will be hard.
Don't be too detailed, otherwise you'll traverse into _Maps of Meaning_ territory.

Get media coverage!
You'll have to play a subtle political game here.
Pick a controversial political position and nod to it.
Your political buddies will love you.
Most other people won't even notice it.
Did you spot it in _Nudge_, _Rich Dad, Poor Dad_, or _The Better Angels of Our Nature_?
Didn't think so.
But your book will make an entire media tour, thanks to your political pals and their talk shows.


Write for the legacy!
Life is nothing but a Sisyphean struggle to leave a scratch in the eternal braid of time.
Writing gives you a sliver of a chance to do just that.
A fool would search for his soulmate through a thousand worlds and ten thousand lifetimes.
A romantic would write for twice as many, just to read his writing in the next one.

Thomas Chatterton has had more influence on romanticism than anyone else.
He also committed suicide at the age of seventeen.
After writing something good, make it great.
Die!
Preferably while young.
Being white and male[^1] helps as well.

Just fucking write, alright!

[^1]: Dear Women, please don't be discouraged.
    It was brought to my attention, that Sylvia Plath committed suicide at age 30.
