---
layout: post
title: "If X Then Taste"
hidden: True
date: 2026-02-22 16:31:00 -0800
---

Taste means understanding what an audience likes and having the ability to communicate it.
Society treats it as if it were a person's innate quality.
That's wrong and discouraging.
But that's also why today it's the hottest commodity in the SF tech scene:

{% include tweet.html
   name="Sam Gerstenzang"
   avatar="/assets/tweet-avatars/gerstenzang.jpg"
   author="@gerstenzang"
   date="Feb 18, 2026"
   content="The funny thing about taste in Silicon Valley is that: 1) it's always been an important trait (not a skill) 2) it is so rare that if we were all asked to name 5 people with the best taste in the history of Silicon Valley, it would be pretty much the same list of 5 people"
   url="https://x.com/gerstenzang/status/2024229942532485608"
%}

In reality, most people don't develop taste for the same reason they don't learn how to draw or speak a second language.
Developing taste requires looking stupid before appearing smart.
Here I'll share my tales of looking stupid.

## How I found my taste in wine

When I was 15, I thought I'd be a lot cooler if I understood wine.
So when my aunt, on her trip to Latvia, offhandedly mentioned "oh, you should totally come to our vineyard", I jumped at it.

That's how I spent my winter holidays installing protective cylinders over tiny pinot gris saplings.
My aunt's vineyard is in Philip Island, which is just off the coast of Melbourne.
For my aunt, wine and flavor at large is her main craft, and through her taste in it she is able to earn her living and be fairly successful at it.
I think it's particularly curious how that taste transforms into a variety of encounters in life.
At the dinner table, she would pay attention to how people talk about the wine and look for cues.
It would feel like dinners would feel almost like testing material for her.
She'd be attentive to how people react to both the wine and the pairing with the food.
Her love for the flavor naturally incorporated into other parts of her everyday encounters, such as the food that she and her husband would make, for the level of experimentation that a lot of times they would do with flavors.
For example, over a Christmas dinner, they organized a dinner consisting of maybe a dozen or so dishes, ranging from the mains to desserts and little appetizers.
They would do, within their family, a little cocktail competition.
It really felt that they took a lot of care around flavor and playing around with it, experimenting with it and getting good flavor.
That was the first place where I had kangaroo meat and probably the only one.
I remember the kangaroo grilled steak to be the most delicious food that even as a vegan today

My cousin has an experimental pop band called The Cool Sounds.
I'd hang out in their band's house in Melbourne whenever I wasn't working in the field.
They'd host house parties with other bands.

They were unpretentious and welcoming.
<!-- TODO maybe cut? -->
Whenever we'd hang out, they would treat me like any other musician in their friend group.
Coming from high-school where I'd barely talk to anyone, that was a monumental shift in my social skills.
<!-- END TODO -->

I found interesting things about me that I did not know myself, such as, for example, that I am a teenager from Europe who's peculiarly interested in wine.
I amplified it, made me discuss it in conversations.
They frequently talked about everyday things with a level of interest and enthusiasm that I would not really consider.
They did not judge other people.
For example, there was a band where one of the bandmates was probably 20 years older than the rest of the band.
They thought of it as the most normal thing in the world because they were shared by their passion for music.
They genuinely liked just playing music and working on their craft without massive amounts of commercial success to back it up.
They didn't really care about commercial success that much, or at least it felt that way.
They really primarily cared about making great music and playing around with it.
They would treat their work as play and share little different things that they've learned along the way.

I went to around a dozen live gigs.
The gigs showed me both the range of what music can be and how people appreciate and love it.
I found it very impressive how, despite it being mainly pop music, every band that I heard, almost every performance, was very unique.
It was a distinct style.
They would experiment with different sounds; it was nothing like the stuff that I would hear on the radio.


<!-- TODO: link to the paragraph above -->
And drank exactly zero glasses of wine.
Because my aunt is a responsible adult.

Now when I came back, everyone expected me to know wine.
Which I did not.
However, I had the newfound confidence to look for good wine and discuss it with people who knew it.
That's how I stumbled into a wine bar with wine-dispenser machines.
If you've never been to one of those, they serve wine by the glass, and keep far more bottles open than a regular bar can.

In this wine bar, I would try multiple glasses of similar wines.
Compare the flavors.
Try to describe them to the sommelier.
Get more recommendations.
And repeat.


Have wine.
Compare similar wines.
Change one thing at a time to figure out what you like.

Pay attention
Figure out what's different and what's similar between bottles.
Go from liking a glass of wine to liking how the acidity and texture work together.
It takes time to learn the industry-specific terms.
Not knowing them shouldn't hinder your progress.
Use stupid words to describe specific things.

> The poetry is there for those who are looking for it.

I value taste in people around me because it shows that they pay attention to things most people don't.
They are able to see beauty in things most people don't.

Ask for recommendations.
Now you know something about what you like and what you don't.
Find things that have more of what you like.
1. Asking for recommendations forces you to express what you like (and dislike) in concrete terms.
2. Having more of the things you like is the whole point.

## The Wine Merchant

"Creative geniuses" have an exceptional sense for what their target audience likes.
I'll give you an example of one.
<!-- TODO: how to smoothly transition the timeline from past (i.e. When I lived in Warsaw) to present being me living in Warsaw (i.e. the wine merchant asks) -->
While living in Warsaw I came across a small wineshop that's overfilling with clients.
I approach the Italian vintner and ask for a recommendation.

"What's the occasion?"

"It's for a date."

"Is she(?) Polish?"

"Yeah"

"And around your age?"

I answer and ask whether this has anything to do with the choice of wine.
The vintner proceeds to describe the correlations between demographics and wine preferences.
He suggests a couple of options.
There's a semi-sweet that's a safe option and a semi-dry that's more complex but might be a hit or miss.
I take the risk.
We're going to a weird exhibition after all.

On the next day, I'm opening the bottle.
The exhibition was a miss.
I explain to my date how I bought the bottle.
As she tries the wine, she tells me: "I normally only drink sweet wine but this is really good."

The wine merchant is a genius.
Whether he's great at marketing or predicting wine preferences, I don't know to this day.
But he has taste and he knows how to use it to sell[^1].
Taste is closely linked with the ability to sell.
That's why taste is SF tech scene's hottest commodity.

### Taste and Voice

Voice is the ability to create things that pass the taste-test.
Voice is as personal as taste.
A person's ability to appreciate something surpasses their ability to create it.
Taste is the principle that guides voice.
An artist's struggle is in the tension between having the taste of what would be beautiful and not having the voice to express it clearly enough.
An artist's highest pleasure is in seeing their taste and voice meet.
Being your favorite writer for a day is a beautiful feeling.

### Voice and LLMs

LLMs make execution cheap.
That's why taste is increasingly valuable.
LLM's voice is quickly commoditized.
The subjective decisions they make become generic.
They become generic because they are (unconsciously) adopted en masse.
Unsuccessful subjective decisions are cringe to begin with.
Successful LLM decisions sprint through the (original -> standard -> cringe) cycle.

Consider the em dash.
Just two years ago it was a sign of careful writing.
A writer who distinguishes the cases that call for regular dash vs em dash shows that they pay attention.
Taking the time to insert a symbol that's missing on most keyboards demonstrates respect for one's writing.
Em dash communicates to the reader less as punctuation and more as a proxy of writing quality.
This is similar to the brown M&M test.
Van Halen required a bowl of M&Ms in the backstage with all the brown ones removed.
This was buried as a clause in their rider.
They did so because their concerts required insanely complex setups.
A gig manager who misses a brown M&M from the rider likely missed stage weight, rigging load, or voltage specs from the rider as well.



## Remaining questions/room for future thinking

1. Lulu's advice on communicating your own unfiltered selves seems relevant.
    I just can't figure out how.
2. Using LLMs for writing dampens voice.
    Why?
    How does it happen?
3. Why being basic sucks
