---
layout: post
title: "xmd Quickstart"
hidden: True
date: 2026-02-18 10:00:00 +00000
---

xmd stands for executable markdown.
It allows you to define CLI code in English and execute it directly with `xmd filename.xmd`

## Setup

### Prerequisites

1. **python:** `python3` must be available on your path.
2. **LLM API key:** `xmd` supports Anthropic, OpenAI, [Requesty](requesty.ai) (recommended).

### Installation

Install `xmd`:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://storage.googleapis.com/docs-recurse-ml/xmd/install.sh | bash
```

Configure cloud provider:

```bash
xmd setup
```


## hi, world!

Now create a file named `hi.xmd` and paste in:

```
print "hi, world!"
```

Now run `xmd hi.xmd` and you should see "hi, world!" printed back.

Let's try something more useful.
Replace content's of `hi.xmd` with the following:

```
print "What's your favorite number?"
store user's input in `fave_num`.
print f"haha, {fave_num + 1} is a superior number!"
```

Run `xmd hi.xmd` again!

**Exercise:** implement [hangman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hangman_(game)) word game using xmd.
As extra credit add a 60s timer to solve the entire word.

## When things go wrong!

If the executed code is buggy and you can't figure out why, you can run:

```bash
xmd wtf <optional question>
```

That will explain the relevant part of the underlying python code responsible for the bug and how you can modify the `xmd` code to fix it.

**Exercise:** implement Conway's game of life.
It should display the grid in the user's terminal and update in steps.
The approach for defining terminal graphics is up to you.

## Execution model

Behind the scenes, running `xmd` on a new/changed file generates python code and executes it.
You can inspect the file in `~/.xmd/tmp/<filename>.py`.
Hopefully 

Notice how running `xmd` the second time on the same (unchanged) file is faster.
That's because the generation step is cached.

